Contain IES and stuff.
You
Alex Hi.
Hi, London. And you first. So do you have anybody?
Yes, it's morning,
one member of mine.
So
big morning
Everyone. Welcome to the Primary
Production Select committee.
Um, we've got you for 15 minutes, so we're in your hands,
Right? Good
morning. Good morning everyone.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
to the Select Committee for primary production.
Uh, my name is a Dr. Alexander Bison.
Um, and this is my colleague Dr.
Um Anna, both from Horticulture New Zealand.
Uh, horticulture New Zealand is a levy funded, uh,
advocacy organization for New Zealand's, um,
commercial fruit
and vegetable growers representing, uh,
more than 4,300 growers, um, who produce
around a hundred different crops, both, um,
supplying the domestic and the export markets.
And, uh, together with the government, um,
the horticulture sector aims to double farm gate value
by 2035.
And if we are to achieve this goal, there is a need
to protect the existing horticulture plantings
that we already have, uh, as well as innovating the growth
of the, of the sector.
And for this, we have, uh, five points to discuss, uh,
today in this matter.
Uh, the first one is, um,
a strong biosecurity systems critical
to protect New Zealand's existing horticulture.
Sector horticulture contributes nearly to $5 billion
in export revenue and to New Zealand GDP,
and it's essential to domestic food supply.
Uh, it is critical that the existing sector is protected
from new and high impact organisms that could reduce yield,
impact the quality of our produce, um,
and jeopardize our current market access.
Also critical is access to international plant germ blossom.
Uh, new germ blossom allows New Zealand crows, uh,
to provide new offerings to the export and domestic market,
and helps us to adapt to challenges
to climate change and pest and disease.
So striking the balance between Crow
and protect, um, across the plant import system is, um,
essential for long-term success of our sector.
And ultimately, um, pest
and disease prevention is, um,
is significantly cheaper than, um,
than eradication management, especially
to a sector in itself.
Our second point is that, um,
stakeholders from the entire supply chain must be included
in plant import systems, discussions, plant importers
and growers, all part of the same, uh,
same, same supply chain.
And if the import systems fails to prevent, uh,
new pesting diseases to arrive in New Zealand,
growers will bear the risks
and the costs of biosecurity conversion, um, uh, responses.
If the system is unworkable for importers,
crawls will miss out on access
to new varieties and the innovation.
Our thirdly, um,
Horton De Zealand supports an end to end review
of the plant input system.
Uh, MPI has initiated a plant input systems reform project,
and with, for New Zealand being a strong
and active collaborator on that project, uh,
we believe this review is necessary
as the current system is slow, costly, and,
and, uh, stifles innovation in this case.
Uh, for maximum benefit,
the review should take a wide scope,
and we expect that the systems improvements that arise
as a result of that review, um, will translate to cost
and time savings over the whole import system.
Our fourth point here is
that MPIs post entry quarantine service costs, uh,
could be structured to improve accessibility
to the diversity of the sector.
Uh, h New Zealand believes the import systems cost structure
is worth revisiting to improve affordability,
um, for the industry.
While maintaining high biosecurity standards, uh,
significant fee increases may make importation
to undesirable, especially for small and promising sectors.
A review could include exploration of, uh,
incremental fee increase, uh, allowing industries to adopt
and plan ahead over time.
Um, the level of public benefit associated
with new germ lessons could be revisited, um, and
therefore the public private cost share, uh,
and a long, uh, a low interest government loan
for importers payable over an extended period.
As we do understand that the upfront costs
to importers take years to recuperate.
And our final point is that, uh,
HOR New Zealand supports the building
of the plant health environment capability
facilities up in Auckland.
That new facility will replace the current PHEL facility in
East, which has long been identified as out of date,
and no longer fit for purpose.
We support the new facility being built in a way
that ensures it is fit for purpose for the future.
It is important to note that
that facility has two principle functions, um, one,
to provide biosecurity system services such as surveillance,
diagnostics, export assurance,
and managing, um, biosecurity, incursions and responses.
And the second is the plant input systems services, uh, such
as post entry quarantine
and diagnostic testing to separate things.
Um, Horton believes that, um, it is important
to decouple the building of the PHEC facility.
From the review of the input system.
Both can, uh, occur concurrently
and both will benefit the sector.
Uh, thank you and happily. Um, welcome.
Any questions, Steve?
Brilliant. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
has the methodology and technology changed significantly in
the last five years for, for, for testing?
Germ plasm?
Uh, the technologies are always evolving. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and we would expect that NPI is keeping an eye on those
and will incorporate those as appropriate.
Um, over time, I mean, the last five years, yes,
things are always changing and they will continue
to change into the future, and we would expect that to be,
um, taken on board as appropriate in New Zealand.
So, is there a risk that we're overspending on something,
that there's a cheaper option for now
because of the technological innovation?
We don't see that, uh,
spending on the facility now means
that we can't adopt the new innovation in the future.
Um, we would expect the facility to be designed in a way
that, um, we could incorporate new
technologies as available.
Uh, and as Alex noted, it's, it's important to say
that the facility has dual purposes.
So one is the biosecurity biosecurity system services
that we rely on every day,
and the other part is the import, the germs import system
services, which are also critical,
but they're one part of the facility,
not the entire facility.
So why would you do an end-to-end review
of the current system but exclude one
of the most significant parts of it?
Uh, we didn't suggest that it would be excluded.
Post entry quarantine is, uh, one part of the system,
but an end-to-end review would look across, um,
offshore facilities and Port Health standard development,
et cetera, noting that post entry quarantine is one part
of the entire system.
So it wouldn't be excluded.
We would expect post entry quarantine is a, a part
of the system that needs to exist, uh, in some shape
or form onshore. Mm.
So, so you could, in terms of what you talked about,
the significant fee increases that, um, post entry, uh,
quarantining is a potential barrier to the entry
of new germ plasm.
Um, so you,
and you mentioned public private partnerships, you are open
to there being more than one import facility
and quarantine facility in the country.
And that that could be run by other such
as out of Lincoln University.
We don't have a view on that. You don't have a view?
We have, we, we need a post quarantine facility
that, or facilities that meets the required standards.
Final question, Mr. Chief? Yes.
Um, so it's correct that
the normal regulated germ plasm pathway
is the safest pathway from a biosecurity point of view.
And most of the issues we get, such as
with Mum Raiders stink bag
or hornets most recently is through the
cargo e-commerce and freight
That we need to be managing all pathways.
Yep. Uh, plant germplasm is a critically important pathway
to be managing because those plants are then gonna get
propagated up, um, sent around the country
to be then growing on.
So,
But it's in the last three years,
it's not the major problem for us in terms of biosecurity.
It is not, it's got a robust system
in place. It's potential to be
That It, it, it is, it is working
because we have a really good system in base
account captures it.
We probably wanna wanna see it as the,
the life plan imports is the highest risk pathway and
therefore why the highest level of, um, management.
Yes. But you do think that private partner, like
for example, you think Lincoln Lincoln University could
maintain the same high standard?
We, I mean, when we said,
we said the public private cost here,
not a public-private partnership Okay.
Was the point that was raised about the fee structure.
I guess one of the suggestions has been
that there could be, um,
more than one facility in the country
and the technology as such
that there are much lower cost ways of doing the same tests.
It could be done in multiple locations.
There's, there's one additional risk
with multiple locations for testing, which is that, um, some
of the pathogens and pests
that we're worried about are easily dispersed.
And so moving them between facilities, uh,
does create an additional risk.
One final. 'cause currently you've only got one facility,
so you now gotta move them from the north island
to the south island, for example.
Wouldn't it be better if you
wanted to report to the south island?
You go to a facility there
and you wanna report to the north island, you go
to a facility there or a couple there,
doesn't it reduce the amount of movement? The
Material doesn't leave the facility until it's, um,
being tested and is deemed high quality test free material.
So what's The disadvantage in having one in
or more than one in each island?
So a, a again, we do not oppose, um, uh, two,
two facilities being, being, uh, in place.
Yeah. It's not the point.
Um, it might be important to see that the, the,
the larger component of the cost for the facility
for importers is actually the biocon containment component.
The rent of the rooms to maintain, um,
a safe environment Yeah.
To test that. Not necessarily the tests,
because the tests can be run, uh, in other facilities on,
on a different management.
In, in, in the same way it's a biocon containment component
that is critical.
And as far as I understand,
there is no other facility that can provide that.
Yeah. Or it's planning to. Yeah.
Okay. We have a question online from Mark
den. You there, mark?
Yeah. Thank you Mr. Chair.
And it's always a pleasure to see you. Good people.
I apologize for my wonderful fatigues. I'm in hospital.
Um, the question I have for the officials is
how do you square that?
The industry itself is quite critical of the new facility.
Uh, and just to extrapolate out some of the questions
that have been asked by Mr.
Abel, um, why couldn't a lot of this be privatized and,
and reduce the cost?
Now you say the risk parameters and
or profile are very high, should the this,
these biologics be moved, uh, in absence of coming straight
to your facility, but how do you square Mr.
Abel's question, which I think is a very salient one
direct pathway straight into Christchurch Airport
and straight into a private facility that might arguably
offer the same services, um,
and have a subsidized cost
because the industry's saying this is gonna add significant
levy costs to them and they can't absorb them.
Uh, Sorry, Mr.
Chair, is that a question that should
actually go to officials? These aren't,
These aren't, um,
Well, sure, but the, the, in this,
this is hot nz, is it not?
Yep. Yep. Well, they might have thoughts on that.
So just to clarify, so the question was how do we square,
um, some of our own industry having views on this?
Yes. Yes. So, sure.
Uh, you have heard
last week from some of the importers
of Ger Plaza material Yep.
How our members are the growers
who are then part of that supply chain.
They're the end users of the material. Mm.
And so they bear the biosecurity risk if, uh,
the import system doesn't adequately manage to biosecurity
the biosecurity, uh, challenges.
So our membership
is very hot on good biosecurity systems.
Uh, we did a recent, um, grower sentiment study, uh, survey,
and the early indications are that biosecurity was their,
their number one, um, concern.
So there's obviously gonna be a wide range of views within
4,000 plus members.
Yes, of course. But biosecurity is certainly
of concern to our membership.
Just to turn, in addition to, to, to to,
to extrapolate out Steve Abel's question,
do you think there's an avenue for the privatization
or the, the co-sharing as it were between, uh,
the crown's role as the biosecurity, uh, regulator
as it were, and then a private enterprise
that could be working in conjunction with them?
Could you see that working?
Yeah, I, I think the most important thing is
that we need a facility quite quickly.
Our current facility is at the end of its life.
Um, and we are not aware
of anyone else who's putting this on the table.
Um, and so we are very supportive
of this facility being built.
Okay. Thank you. You right there, mark. Yeah. Thanks Dean.
Um, a couple of sub, the submitters
that we had last week talked about, um, in the case
of overseas jurisdictions where they had, uh,
inspection facilities prior to the, uh, in the country
of origin before, um, the, uh,
ger plasma arrived in their country
and it significantly sped up the process.
Do you have any view on that?
Because it'd be interesting to hear
what the industry thinks.
Yeah, so, um, one of our points was
that we support the end-to-end review
of the PLM import system.
And if there are, uh, ways that we can speed the process
or reduce the costs,
or ideally both, um, whilst
adequately managing the biosecurity risks,
we would be supportive of that.
So we, uh, we encourage NPI to look broad, um,
across the whole system
and where those efficiencies can be gained, um, whilst still
managing biosecurity to a high level.
Thanks very much. Um, look, we've come to time, um,
goes very quickly and we appreciate, um, uh,
your, uh, submission today.
Mr. Can you provide us your notes here?
I didn't get that document. Yes. Um, you can provide it.
Yep. Yes. Yep. Brilliant.
So we'll move on now to, uh, NPI.
Welcome Stuart. Sure. So
obviously you've been, um, taking note of the, um,
submissions that we had last week plus,
um, what happened today.
So, uh, 15 minutes and, and, uh, yeah.
I'm sure there'll be plenty of questions too, Stuart.
Yeah. Yeah. By away.
Thank you. Um, look, thanks, thanks for the opportunity
to come this morning.
Um, this introduced Lisa Winthrop, uh, she looks at
for import health standard part of the whole system.
Uh, and Fran is, uh, the director of, uh, our diagnostics,
uh, surveillance readiness.
So the laboratory that's being built, um, uh,
that whole function.
Um, look, I'll just make a few remarks, uh,
and then of course, questions and discussion.
Um, so look, to start with, I mean, as, as we all know,
obviously, um, uh, in Zealand, our food
and fiber sector is a huge part of our economy.
Over 80% of our, of our export earnings,
nearly $60 billion last year, horticultures
around $9 billion of that.
Um, we are really fortunate, as we know in New Zealand
that we don't have a lot of the pests
and disease that other countries struggle with.
Um, that gives our growers easier market access.
It makes it least costly as well in terms of production.
So maintaining that obviously is critical,
and that requires a strong biosecurity system.
Um, overseas we've seen what can be at stake, uh, the X
pathogen in Europe, uh,
which has caused billions of euros of damage.
It's decimated olives, um, olives, grapevines,
some fruit citrus.
Uh, here we particularly worry about things like fruit
flies, stink bug, viruses, rusts, uh, that pose major risks
to our, to our horticulture sector
and to having them here would be devastating.
So what we need to do is we need to get that balance right.
Uh, we need, we need to protect our primary
industries, our environment.
We also, of course, need to allow trade
and movement of goods and importation of material.
Um, but given what's at stake, um, our biosecurity system,
uh, does have some strictest
or strongest rules in the world.
Um, and that's for good reason
because of what, what we need to protect.
So the Plant Health Environment capability program,
the laboratory, um, as you know, it's a major investment.
It's building this facility in Auckland, uh,
a modern high containment diagnostic quarantine facility.
Um, it'll future proof our bio security system.
Uh, we expect it to last
for at least the next 50 years to service us.
Um, and we know that the current facility in Tamaki,
it's really end of life.
It's too, it's old, it's too small,
it can't meet the demands now
and going forward, um, important to note,
and the comment has been made that, you know, the,
the large part of this investment is in the diagnostic part
of, of this facility.
Um, so that's, um, that's the diagnostic testing, uh,
and all the capability that goes into supporting
surveillance by security responses, testing
and diagnostics for trade and market assurance.
The quarantine facility, uh,
for importing plant material is about 10%
of the overall cost of that investment.
Um, this facility also will be interoperable
for animal diseases.
So, uh, if we have a major, major issue,
and hopefully we don't, but like foot
and mouth disease, bird flu, this facility will also be able
to handle animal diseases.
So it provides resilience to the system in addition
to the Wallace floor facility that we have
for animal diseases.
The recent responses around hornets fruit fly,
the two fruit flies in Auckland,
demonstrates the value of that facility.
Um, our scientists
and that facility, the current old one,
were really at the core of those responses
and the diagnostics and the surveillance
and supporting that response.
So where we're at with it, um,
ministers have approved the final business
case construction's underway.
We expect it to be open in early, early 2029 for business.
The post entry quarantine part of it, for the plant imports,
as I say, you know, it's about 10% of the total cost.
Um, it does allow plants to be imported, uh,
for the horticulture industry to grow the industry.
Um, and, and we do know that we need to, we need
to quarantine those plants coming in because, um,
because of what we're protecting
and the risk inherent with that.
Just this year, we have found, um, plant viruses
and grape farm stock that we're in the quarantine facility.
So we know, um, that it serves a valuable purpose.
Um, look, as you know,
we are the only facility in the country.
Um, we know these facilities are expensive.
Um, they provide a very high level of containment.
They have very specialist facilities.
Um, and that's one
of the reasons why the government's only providing it,
acknowledging the price
and the cost pressure on the industry for using it.
Um, the crown does subsidize the use of,
of the quarantine facility.
And currently, uh, the crown is subsidizing it to the tune
of 50%, uh, the cost of using those facilities.
Uh, we do also offer the option of sharing units
to bring down cost, and we are exploring, uh,
bringing the time down for certain, certain species
and plants, um, that,
that they'll spend less time in quarantine.
Uh, we do recognize offshore facilities.
We've got six that we recognize and allow.
Um, but again, um, they do need to meet our standards and,
and we have some strict requirements.
So we are open to recognizing more offshore facilities.
Just lastly, on the import health standards,
which set the rules for how you import things and treatments
and what can and can't come in, um, the plant
to import system that's been talked about.
Look, we know, we know that that system has challenges.
We know it takes far too long
to produce new standards to update them.
Uh, and it's, and it's a, it's, it's,
it's a difficult system to navigate.
So hence we are doing that reform and review,
and we do want to make it work smarter and,
and faster and more efficiently.
Um, and what, you know, we're looking at things like ai, uh,
ways we can, we can drive efficiencies, ways,
we can do it smarter and working with, uh, a number of, of,
of stakeholders across industry on that.
So look, thank you for the opportunity
and of course, uh, welcome questions.
We'll start with Joe.
Thank you. Um, thanks for your time with us this morning.
Um, I just have a couple of, uh, I guess a couple
of questions for you.
Um, this new facility in, uh, that's being built, I would,
um, suggest perhaps that rather than being an expense,
it's actually an investment in our, I would say,
primary industries, but also
other, other parts of
New Zealand. Would you agree with that?
Oh, it is. Look, this is a, this is a huge investment, uh,
in biosecurity for the language of New Zealand.
Um, it, it, it will provide that critical service. Yeah.
Uh, like I said, it's interoperable for animal diseases.
Uh, it also has a high quarantine facility
that could be used for, for some, uh, human pandemic type,
uh, uh, challenges or issues as well.
So yes, it, it's a critical investment
in the country's infrastructure.
Yeah, that's right. I, yeah, I think it's, um,
sometimes we tend to look at things a bit
as an expense rather than actually actually an investment,
which is, which is what it is.
Um, just two other quick questions with regard to the, um,
the, the program that you're just undertaking to look at,
uh, reducing, um, the length of time this process takes
that you mentioned around the, uh, efficiency
of the IHE system.
You're doing some trials, you said, with ai, et cetera.
Yeah. How long do you expect that sort of program
or, um, that to give you an idea of just
how more efficient you can become?
And then my last question is with regards
to other facilities as, um, Steve mentioned maybe at Lincoln
or what have you, would
that not potentially pose an increased risk given
that obviously almost majority of it imports, et cetera,
and all that sort of stuff comes into Auckland
and then you have to potentially, if this was a thing,
transfer it down to transport it to say Christchurch, would
that not increase biosecurity risk by doing that?
Are we not better to just keep it at that one new facility
that that will be built in specifically for purpose?
Yeah. Yeah. Look, thanks.
Um, so on the import health standard reforming
and getting that working better, so works underway on that.
We've had a number of workshops with, uh, a large number of,
of players from across the sector.
Um, the ai, uh, we've done a proof of concept.
We're now moving into actually, um, building some AI tools
that we can use in parts of that process.
Uh, we, we, and we've also, we've also worked
through some old standards, um,
and, uh, cleared some of the amount that,
that weren't being used anymore, focus on the priority ones.
We expect, uh, in the next, uh, 12, 12 to 18 months, uh,
we will start to see, uh, real changes starting
to come in the system and,
and things starting to move faster,
standards getting updated, produced quicker.
Uh, and it will be an ongoing piece of work.
There's some, there's, there's some immediate things
to get the current process working efficiently,
but longer term, there's probably some more fundamental
changes to the way the whole thing works as well.
So we, we are open to, and wanting to work through both
on the question of the facility and where it is
and types of facilities look to start with.
We are completely open to
and welcoming of anyone else wanting to establish
and operate a quarantine facility in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, there is, there, there are,
there are no barriers to that.
Um, and we would be supportive, uh,
and open to someone else running a quarantine facility.
They need to meet the standards
and the requirements that go with that, um, for,
for our requirements mm-hmm.
And, and our trading partners. Mm-hmm.
That has been the barrier.
These are very, very expensive specialized facilities.
Um, and it's really the containment, um, part of it.
Uh, so, you know, a laboratory, uh, is not
that expensive to build.
It's the containment, uh, to, to contain
and stop, you know, micro practical size funding
and things like that, that getting out that, that,
that, that is the challenge.
Um, and then in terms of the location, um, most
of our plant material imports, uh,
and most of, most of the things
that we get over the border in terms of things that need
to go to a laboratory to be tested, uh, are in
that Auckland region
because of the volume
of cargo passengers material comes through Auckland.
So, so that's the reason the current facility has been
in Auckland for many years.
Um, so, so we, so, you know, we worked
through quite a process around building any
place where would you put it?
Is Auckland the best place or not?
Um, but we've landed back with Auckland.
Auckland is a logical place,
and we've got an animal laboratory here in Wallace
full up the road.
Um, so having, having two facilities
that are interoperable in different parts of the country
provides some good resilience for biosecurity as well.
We do also have, uh, a small laboratory in Christchurch,
um, with flus people.
They don't do quarantine
and they don't do the high level containment stuff,
but the, um, uh, staff
and scientists in laboratory there
that do diagnostics on PEs and diseases
and things that come over the border or that people report.
Thank you, Steve. Yeah.
So it's just to be clear,
I I don't think anyone's questioning the huge
importance of biosecurity.
Like it's not contested.
Yeah. Um, it's interesting that 10% of the cost
of this one is the quarantine, which seems
to be the hardest bit of it.
And, and 90% of it is the testing and diagnos diagnostics.
Is that correct? And because,
because what I'm trying to understand is that, um,
if the capability of the character of the technology
that can do that diagnostics has become a lot more available
and lower cost in recent years,
would we be spending the money the same way now if
we had that same amount of money mm-hmm.
In terms of investment in overall biosecurity, is this place
that we would be spending it,
and is that where there's an opportunity
for greater efficiencies
and greater cost saving without any compromise
of biosecurity?
I, I'll, well let flu answer that question.
Yeah. So just, um, to pick up on what you said,
so approximately 10% of the cost associated
with the post entry quarantine greenhouse, which is a former
of Biocon containment, the other 90% is associated
with building the biocon containment laboratories.
So that's, um, physical containment level two
and three for microorganisms invertebrates.
Right. Um, and plants, um, the biocon containment for
microorganisms at level three is extremely expensive, right.
'cause of the airflow, the pressure. Yep.
Uh, the hip filtration, the need to test, um,
to treat all of the wastewater.
Um, and that's what is the biggest driver
of the cost to the facility.
Gotcha. Um, but speaking, I guess to your questions
around diag diagnostic technology.
Mm. Um, diagnostic technology is constantly evolving
and my team is, uh, constantly developing new tests.
So we, uh, the first laboratory in New Zealand
that's been accredited to do, um,
high throughput sequencing, um, for a range of, um,
diseases, uh, we
actually can do more high throughput sequence testing, um,
of commodities than, um, Australia does on their facility.
Uh, we've also put in place, um, EDNA, um, testing
for monitoring and testing of a number of viruses.
We are looking into it for surveillance, um, of mid vectors
of arboviruses.
Uh, and we've also, um, recently implemented DNA based, um,
surveillance for B mites.
Mm-hmm. Now, the challenge
for us in our current facility is we are constrained in
deploying new technologies
because the biocon containment is just not keeping up
with modern standards.
And also in order to work efficiently
and avoid the risk of cross contamination,
when you're doing this mm, you need the additional space.
Um, I quite often get people say to me,
why are you building such a big lab?
You know, you're gonna fill it with a whole lot of people.
And my answer is actually no.
Um, because in the future we are gonna be deploying more
automation and more robotics, and guess what?
Those machines take a lot more space.
Um, and we've seen that happen at Willville.
We've, we've deployed, um, robotics for FMD testing that
as soon as you put those machines in the lab,
there's not a lot of room for the people.
So we are very, very mindful of, um, needing
to design this in a way that we can flex
and deploy new technologies. The
Final one, Mr. Chair.
Yep. Quickly, um,
do you support this in end-to-end review
of the current import system that
H New Zealand called for?
Yes. Yeah. And that's, and that's what we're working on, uh,
starting off with plans, uh, in terms of,
so the import health standard,
it's really the import health standard process in terms
of you want to import something into the country, um,
what is that end to end process to do it, uh,
import health standards is a big part in that,
but they feed into the quarantine requirements
and treatments and so on.
So yes, that is, that is the work
and the program that we have underway, uh, across that end
to end, we are the efficiencies, uh,
that we can make some fundamental performance.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Alright. We've got time for
One last question from Mark Cameron.
Make a quick mark. We're running outta
Time. Thanks. Very quickly,
Stuart,
how do you square away the criticism from the industry
or someone in the industry that has said that it's an
exorbitant cost and it's gonna add significant levies
that will only stifle innovation
there in, how do you square that?
Yeah, look, uh, no thanks, mark.
Um, and, and look, as I said, you know, we are sympathetic
to the costs on users of this facility, uh, for quarantine.
Um, uh, you know, the, the, the, it's, it's, it's tricky.
You know, there, there's the balance of obviously
what we're trying to protect the cost
of these facilities to actually have them.
Hence there aren't private sector operators of them.
Uh, so what, you know, what, what we can do best there,
mark, is the things we've, we've talked about, um, to start
with currently as things stand without changing anything,
you know, we are subsidizing 50% of the cost to the users.
Mm-hmm. Um, then the things like bringing the time down, um,
if we can, if, if we are able to, to verify
and certify more offshore facilities.
Absolutely. And then these changes to the system whereby,
um, uh, you know, some of the requirements, uh,
could be amended that either again, make it quicker,
shorter, easier to get through, um,
or with new, new, new diagnostics and testing.
So there's a suite of things in there.
There isn't a silver bullet.
Um, but we are committed to working through, uh,
and with industry
and with all the stakeholders
to actually just get this working the most efficient way it
can, balancing why we need it
and what we're trying to protect as well.
Thanks, Stuart. Very grateful. Thanks very much.
Um, we've come to time, so I appreciate, um,
you taking the time to come and see us.
We may have a couple of written questions perhaps. Sure,
Absolutely. Yeah.
Yeah. But thank you very much. Okay.